\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c vim: filetype=texinfo expandtab tabstop=4 shiftwidth=4
@c %**start of header (This is for running Texinfo on a region.)
@setfilename gawkworkflow.info
@settitle GNU Awk Development Workflow
@c %**end of header (This is for running Texinfo on a region.)

@dircategory Text creation and manipulation
@direntry
* Gawk Work Flow: (gawkworkflow).                 Participating in @command{gawk} development.
@end direntry
@dircategory Individual utilities
@direntry
* Gawk Work Flow: (gawkworkflow)Overview.         Participating in @command{gawk} development.
@end direntry

@c With early 2014 texinfo.tex, restore PDF links and colors
@tex
\gdef\linkcolor{0.5 0.09 0.12} % Dark Red
\gdef\urlcolor{0.5 0.09 0.12} % Also
\global\urefurlonlylinktrue
@end tex

@set xref-automatic-section-title

@c The following information should be updated here only!
@c This sets the edition of the document, the version of gawk it
@c applies to and all the info about who's publishing this edition

@c These apply across the board.
@set UPDATE-MONTH February, 2019

@set TITLE Participating in @command{gawk} Development
@set EDITION 0.72

@iftex
@set DOCUMENT booklet
@set CHAPTER chapter
@set APPENDIX appendix
@set SECTION section
@set SUBSECTION subsection
@end iftex
@ifinfo
@set DOCUMENT Info file
@set CHAPTER major node
@set APPENDIX major node
@set SECTION minor node
@set SUBSECTION node
@end ifinfo
@ifhtml
@set DOCUMENT Web page
@set CHAPTER chapter
@set APPENDIX appendix
@set SECTION section
@set SUBSECTION subsection
@end ifhtml
@ifdocbook
@set DOCUMENT booklet
@set CHAPTER chapter
@set APPENDIX appendix
@set SECTION section
@set SUBSECTION subsection
@end ifdocbook
@ifxml
@set DOCUMENT booklet
@set CHAPTER chapter
@set APPENDIX appendix
@set SECTION section
@set SUBSECTION subsection
@end ifxml
@ifplaintext
@set DOCUMENT booklet
@set CHAPTER chapter
@set APPENDIX appendix
@set SECTION section
@set SUBSECTION subsection
@end ifplaintext


@ifnottex
@ifnotdocbook
@macro ii{text}
@i{\text\}
@end macro
@end ifnotdocbook
@end ifnottex

@ifdocbook
@macro ii{text}
@inlineraw{docbook,<lineannotation>\text\</lineannotation>}
@end macro
@end ifdocbook

@c For HTML, spell out email addresses, to avoid problems with
@c address harvesters for spammers.
@ifhtml
@macro EMAIL{real,spelled}
``\spelled\''
@end macro
@end ifhtml
@ifnothtml
@macro EMAIL{real,spelled}
@email{\real\}
@end macro
@end ifnothtml


@c merge the function and variable indexes into the concept index
@ifinfo
@synindex fn cp
@synindex vr cp
@end ifinfo
@iftex
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@end iftex
@ifxml
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@end ifxml
@ifdocbook
@synindex fn cp
@synindex vr cp
@end ifdocbook

@c If "finalout" is commented out, the printed output will show
@c black boxes that mark lines that are too long.  Thus, it is
@c unwise to comment it out when running a master in case there are
@c overfulls which are deemed okay.

@iftex
@finalout
@end iftex

@copying
@docbook
<para>Published by:</para>

<literallayout class="normal">Free Software Foundation
51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor
Boston, MA  02110-1301 USA
Phone: +1-617-542-5942
Fax: +1-617-542-2652
Email: <email>gnu@@gnu.org</email>
URL: <ulink url="http://www.gnu.org">http://www.gnu.org/</ulink></literallayout>

<literallayout class="normal">Copyright &copy; 2017, 2018, 2019
Free Software Foundation, Inc.
All Rights Reserved.</literallayout>
@end docbook

@ifnotdocbook
Copyright @copyright{} 2017, 2018, 2019
Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@end ifnotdocbook
@sp 2

This is Edition @value{EDITION} of @cite{@value{TITLE}}.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being ``GNU General Public License'', with the
Front-Cover Texts being ``A GNU Manual'', and with the Back-Cover Texts
as in (a) below.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License''.

@enumerate a
@item
The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have the freedom to
copy and modify this GNU manual.''
@end enumerate
@end copying

@c Comment out the "smallbook" for technical review.  Saves
@c considerable paper.  Remember to turn it back on *before*
@c starting the page-breaking work.

@c 4/2002: Karl Berry recommends commenting out this and the
@c `@setchapternewpage odd', and letting users use `texi2dvi -t'
@c if they want to waste paper.
@c @smallbook


@c Uncomment this for the release.  Leaving it off saves paper
@c during editing and review.
@c @setchapternewpage odd

@c @shorttitlepage @value{TITLE}
@titlepage
@title @value{TITLE}
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}
@subtitle @value{UPDATE-MONTH}
@author Arnold D. Robbins

@ifnotdocbook
@c Include the Distribution inside the titlepage environment so
@c that headings are turned off.  Headings on and off do not work.

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Published by:
@sp 1

Free Software Foundation @*
51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor @*
Boston, MA  02110-1301 USA @*
Phone: +1-617-542-5942 @*
Fax: +1-617-542-2652 @*
Email: @email{gnu@@gnu.org} @*
URL: @uref{http://www.gnu.org/} @*

@c ISBN x-xxxxxx-xx-x @*
@sp 2
@insertcopying
@end ifnotdocbook
@end titlepage

@iftex
@headings off
@evenheading @thispage@ @ @ @strong{@value{TITLE}} @| @|
@oddheading  @| @| @strong{@thischapter}@ @ @ @thispage
@end iftex

@ifnottex
@ifnotxml
@ifnotdocbook
@node Top
@top General Introduction
@c Preface node should come right after the Top
@c node, in `unnumbered' sections, then the first chapter.

This file describes how to participate in software development for
@uref{http://www.gnu.org/software/gawk, GNU Awk (@command{gawk})}.

@insertcopying

@end ifnotdocbook
@end ifnotxml
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Preface::                           Some introductory remarks.
* Contributing::                      How to contribute to @command{gawk}
                                      development.
* Using Git::                         Getting started with Git.
* Configuring git::                   Configuring Git.
* Development without commit access:: How to work without commit access.
* Development with commit access::    How to work with commit access.
* General practices::                 How things should usually be done.
* Repo Maintenance::                  Tips for keeping your repo clean.
* Development Stuff::                 Things you need to know to be a
                                      @command{gawk} developer.
* Cheat Sheet::                       Git command summary.
* Resources::                         Some further resources.
* TODO::                              Stuff still to do.
* Index::                             The index.

@detailmenu
* This Manual::                     How to use this manual.
* Conventions::                     Typographical Conventions.
* Acknowledgments::                 Acknowledgments.
* Reviewers::                       A note to reviewers.
* Push Pull::                       The push/pull software development model.
* Repo Copies::                     What it means to have a copy of a repo.
* Local Branches::                  How to best use local branches.
* Branches are state::              Branches represent development state.
* Repo State::                      The different branch types in the repo.
* Local State::                     Managing local branches.
* Remotes::                         What a ``remote'' is.
* Cloning::                         Cloning the repo the first time.
* Switching Branches::              Moving from one branch to another.
* Starting A New Branch::           Starting a new branch for development.
* Undoing a change::                Throwing away changes.
* Updating::                        Keeping in sync with the upstream repo.
* Rebasing::                        Rebasing A Local Branch.
* Merge Conflicts::                 Dealing With Merge Conflicts.
* Submitting Changes::              How to submit your changes.
* Removing Branches::               Getting rid of unneeded branches.
* Points to remember::              Things you need to keep in mind.
* Initial setup::                   Getting started with commit access.
* ssh clone::                       Cloning using an @samp{ssh://} URL.
* Developing patches::              Developing patches.
* Developing new features::         Developing new features.
* Developing fixes::                Developing fixes.
* Coding style::                    Where to read up on the coding style.
* Doing paperwork::                 Legal stuff in order to contribute.
* Tools::                           Tools to have on your system for
                                    development.
* GNU Tools::                       The GNU Autotools.
* Compilers::                       A discussion of compilers that can be
                                    used.
* Debugging::                       Compiling for debugging.
@end detailmenu
@end menu

@c @summarycontents
@contents

@node Preface
@unnumbered Preface
@c I saw a comment somewhere that the preface should describe the book itself,
@c and the introduction should describe what the book covers.

This @value{DOCUMENT} describes how to participate in development
of GNU Awk (@command{gawk}).  GNU Awk is a Free Software project
belonging to the Free Software Foundation's GNU project.

@cindex Git Project
The @value{DOCUMENT} focuses on participation in the project (that is,
how to work most effectively if you wish to contribute to it) and
also describes how to make use of the @uref{http://git-scm.org, Git}
distributed source code management system for @command{gawk} development.

You should be comfortable working with traditional UNIX-style
tools and with the C language and standard library facilities.

@menu
* This Manual::                 How to use this manual.
* Conventions::                 Typographical Conventions.
* Acknowledgments::             Acknowledgments.
* Reviewers::                   A note to reviewers.
@end menu


@node This Manual
@unnumberedsec Using This Book

This @value{DOCUMENT} has the following chapters and appendices:

@itemize @bullet

@item
@ref{Contributing} describes how to start contributing to
the @command{gawk} project.

@item
@ref{Using Git} introduces the Git distributed source code
management system.

@item
@ref{Configuring git} describes some initial set-up you need to do
before using Git seriously.

@item
@ref{Development without commit access} gets into the meat of the
development workflow, describing how to work if you don't have
commit access to the Savannah repository.

@item
@ref{Development with commit access} continues the discussion,
covering what's different when you can commit directly to the
Savannah repository.

@item
@ref{General practices} describes general development
practices used by the @command{gawk} development team.

@item
@ref{Repo Maintenance} presents several different things
you need to know about to keep your repo in good shape.

@item
@ref{Development Stuff} describes some important points you
should be familiar with in order to participate in @command{gawk}
development and presents some tools that may make your work easier.

@item
@ref{Cheat Sheet} provides a short ``cheat sheet'' summarizing
all the Git commands referenced in this @value{DOCUMENT}.

@item
@ref{Resources} provides a few pointers to Internet
resources for learning more about Git.

@end itemize

@node Conventions
@unnumberedsec Typographical Conventions

@cindex Texinfo
This @value{DOCUMENT} is written in @uref{http://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/, Texinfo},
the GNU documentation formatting language.
A single Texinfo source file is used to produce both the printed and online
versions of the documentation.
@ifnotinfo
Because of this, the typographical conventions
are slightly different than in other books you may have read.
@end ifnotinfo
@ifinfo
This @value{SECTION} briefly documents the typographical conventions used in Texinfo.
@end ifinfo

Examples you would type at the command line are preceded by the common
shell primary and secondary prompts, @samp{$} and @samp{>}.
Input that you type is shown @kbd{like this}.
Output from the command is preceded by the glyph ``@print{}''.
This typically represents the command's standard output.
Error messages and other output on the command's standard error are preceded
by the glyph ``@error{}''.  For example:

@example
$ @kbd{echo hi on stdout}
@print{} hi on stdout
$ @kbd{echo hello on stderr 1>&2}
@error{} hello on stderr
@end example

@ifnotinfo
In the text, almost anything related to programming, such as command
names, variable and function names, and string, numeric and regexp
constants appear in @code{this font}. Code fragments appear in the same
font and quoted, @samp{like this}.  Things that are replaced by the
user or programmer appear in @var{this font}.  Options look like this:
@option{-f}.  File names are indicated like this: @file{/path/to/ourfile}.
Some things are emphasized @emph{like this}, and if a point needs to be
made strongly, it is done @strong{like this}.  The first occurrence of
a new term is usually its @dfn{definition} and appears in the same font
as the previous occurrence of ``definition'' in this sentence.
@end ifnotinfo

Characters that you type at the keyboard look @kbd{like this}.  In particular,
there are special characters called ``control characters.''  These are
characters that you type by holding down both the @kbd{CONTROL} key and
another key, at the same time.  For example, a @kbd{Ctrl-d} is typed
by first pressing and holding the @kbd{CONTROL} key, next
pressing the @kbd{d} key, and finally releasing both keys.

@quotation NOTE
Notes of interest look like this.
@end quotation

@quotation CAUTION
Cautionary or warning notes look like this.
@end quotation

@node Acknowledgments
@unnumberedsec Acknowledgments

@cindex Kahrs, J@"urgen
Thanks to J@"urgen Kahrs for his initial efforts to write a document like this.
Although his prose has not survived, his material was helpful in preparing
this @value{DOCUMENT}.

@cindex Bernat, Yehezkel
Thanks to Yehezkel Bernat for reviewing this document and
in general for his good intentions.

@strong{FIXME:} YOUR NAME HERE...

@node Reviewers
@unnumberedsec Notes to Reviewers

Please let me know if anything is missing, or unclear.
Real errors with respect Git commands and usage are
very important as well.

Spelling errors and typo fixes welcome, but not as important.

@node Contributing
@chapter How to Start Contributing

@command{gawk} development is distributed. It's done using electronic
mail (email) and via branches in the Git repo@footnote{Short for
``repository''.} on @uref{http://savannah.gnu.org, Savannah}, the GNU
project's source code management site.

In this @value{CHAPTER} we use some Git terminology. If you're not at
all familiar with Git, then skim this @value{CHAPTER} and come back
after reading the rest of the @value{DOCUMENT}.

@command{gawk} is similar to many other Free Software projects. To begin
contributing, simply start!  Take a look at the @file{TODO} file in the
distribution, see if there is something of interest to you, and ask on
the @email{bug-gawk@@gnu.org} mailing list if anyone else is working
on it. If not, then go for it!  (@xref{Development Stuff} for a discussion of some
of the technical things you'll need to do. Here we describe the process
in general.)

Your contribution can be almost anything that is relevant for
@command{gawk}, such as code fixes, documentation fixes, and/or new
features.

@quotation NOTE
If possible, new features should be done using @command{gawk}'s extension
mechanism. If you want to add a user-visible language change to the
@command{gawk} core, you're going to have to convince the maintainer
and other developers that it's really worthwile to do so.

Changes that improve performance or portability, or that fix bugs,
or that enable more things in extensions,
will require less convincing, of course.
@end quotation

As you complete a task, submit patches for review to the
@email{bug-gawk@@gnu.org} mailing list, where you'll be given feedback
about your work.  Once your changes are acceptable, the maintainer will
commit them to the Git repository.

Over time, as the maintainer and development team gain confidence in your
ability to contribute, you may be asked to join the private @command{gawk}
developers' mailing list, and/or be granted commit access to the Git
repository on Savannah.  This has happened to more than one person who
just ``came out of the woodwork.''

Until that happens, or if you don't want to join the list, you should
continue to work with private branches and submission of patches to the
mailing list.

Once you have commit access, if you want to make a major change or add a
major feature, where the patch(es) would be very large, it has become the
practice to create a separate branch, based off of @code{master}, to host
the feature. This way the maintainer can review it, and you can continue
to improve it, until it's ready for integration into @code{master}.

@cindex GitHub
@quotation NOTE
Because of the GNU project's requirements for signed paperwork for
contributions, the @command{gawk} project will @strong{not} work
with pull requests from @uref{http://github.com, GitHub} or any other
Git-based software hosting service.  You must submit patches to the
mailing list, and be willing to sign paperwork for large patches.
@end quotation

The @email{bug-gawk@@gnu.org} mailing list is not private. Anyone may
send mail to it, and anyone may subscribe to it.  To subscribe,
go to the list's @uref{https://lists.gnu.org/mailman/listinfo/bug-gawk,
web page} and follow the instructions there.  If you plan to be involved
long-term with @command{gawk} development, then you probably should
subscribe to the list.

@node Using Git
@chapter Using Git

This chapter provides an introduction to using Git. Our point is
@emph{not} to rave about how wonderful Git is, nor to go into painful
detail about how it works.  Rather we want to give you enough background
to understand how to use Git effectively for bug fix and feature
development and to interact (``play nicely'') with the development team.

@menu
* Push Pull::                   The push/pull software development model.
* Repo Copies::                 What it means to have a copy of a repo.
* Local Branches::              How to best use local branches.
* Branches are state::          Branches represent development state.
@end menu

@node Push Pull
@section The ``Push/Pull'' Model of Software Development

Git is a powerful, distributed source code management system.  However,
the way it's used for @command{gawk} development purposely does not take
advantage of all its features.

Instead, the model is rather simple, and in many ways much like more
traditional distributed systems such as the @uref{http://www.nongnu.org/cvs,
Concurrent Versions System} (CVS) or
@uref{http://subversion.apache.org, Subversion} (SVN).

The central idea can be termed ``push/pull.'' You @emph{pull} updates down from
the central repository to your local copy, and if you have commit rights,
you @emph{push} your changes or updates up to the central repository.

Where Git does stand out is in its management of multiple branches of
development. Git makes it very easy to set up a separate branch for
use in fixing a bug or developing a feature.  You can then easily keep
that branch up to date with respect to the main development branch(es),
and eventually merge the changes from your branch into the main branch.

Almost always Git does these merges for you without problem.  When there
is a problem (a @dfn{merge conflict}), usually it is very easy for you
to @dfn{resolve} them and then complete the merge.  We talk about this
in more detail later (@pxref{Merge Conflicts}).

@node Repo Copies
@section How Git Stores Branches and Their Copies

So how does Git work?@footnote{The following description is greatly
simplified.}

A repository consists of a collection of @dfn{branches}. Each branch
represents the history of a collection of files and directories (a file
@dfn{tree}). Each combined set of changes to this collection (files and
directories added or deleted, and/or file contents changed) is termed
a @dfn{commit}.

When you first create a local copy of a remote repository (``clone
the repo''), Git copies all of the original repository's branches to
your local system.  The original remote repository is referred to as
being @dfn{upstream}, and your local repo is @dfn{downstream} from it.
Git distinguishes branches from the upstream repo by prefixing their
names with @samp{origin/}.  Let's draw some pictures. @ref{savannah-repo}
represents the state of the repo on Savannah:

@page
@float Figure,savannah-repo
@caption{The Savannah @command{gawk} Repository}
@smallexample
+======================+
|       Branches       |
+======================+
| master               |
+----------------------+
| gawk-4.1-stable      |
+----------------------+
| gawk-4.0-stable      |
+----------------------+
| feature/fix-comments |
+----------------------+
| ...                  |
+----------------------+
@end smallexample
@end float

@cindex @code{git branch}
After you clone the repo, on your local system you will have a single
branch named @code{master} that's visible when you use @samp{git branch}
to see your branches.

@cindex @code{git clone}
@example
$ @kbd{git clone http://git.savannah.gnu.org/r/gawk.git}  @ii{Clone the repo}
$ @kbd{cd gawk}                                           @ii{Change to local copy}
$ @kbd{git branch}                                        @ii{See branch information}
@print{} * master
@end example

@noindent
The current branch is always indicated with a leading asterisk (@samp{*}).

Pictorially, the local repo looks like @ref{your-repo} (you can ignore
the @samp{T} column for the moment):

@float Figure,your-repo
@caption{Your Local @command{gawk} Repository}
@smallexample
+===+======================++=============================+
| T |    Local Branches    ||      Remote Branches        |
+===+======================++=============================+
| X | master               || origin/master               |
+---+----------------------++-----------------------------+
|   |                      || origin/gawk-4.1-stable      |
+---+----------------------++-----------------------------+
|   |                      || origin/gawk-4.0-stable      |
+---+----------------------++-----------------------------+
|   |                      || origin/feature/fix-comments |
+---+----------------------++-----------------------------+
|   |                      || ...                         |
+---+----------------------++-----------------------------+
@end smallexample
@end float

@noindent
@cindex @code{origin/} branches
@cindex branches, @code{origin/}
Note that what is simply @code{gawk-4.1-stable} in the upstream repo
is now referred to as @code{origin/gawk-4.1-stable}.  The @samp{origin/}
branches are a snapshot of the state of the upstream repo. This is
how Git allows you to see what changes you've made with respect to the
upstream repo, without having to actually communicate with the upstream
repo over the Internet.  (When files are identical, Git is smart enough
to not have two separate physical copies on your local disk.)

If you're working on a simple bug fix or change, you can do so directly
in your local @code{master} branch. You can then commit your changes,
and if you have access rights, push them upstream to the Savannah repo.
(However, there is a process to follow. Please read the rest of
this @value{DOCUMENT}.)

@node Local Branches
@section Local Branches

@cindex local branches
@cindex branches, local
Let's talk about local branches in more detail.  (The terminology used
here is my own, not official Git jargon.) There are two kinds of local
branches:

@table @dfn
@item Tracking Branches
@cindex tracking branches
@cindex branches, tracking 
@cindex @code{git checkout}
Tracking branches track branches from the upstream repository.  You first
create a tracking branch simply by checking out a branch from the
upstream. You use the branch name without the leading @samp{origin/}
prefix. For example, @samp{git checkout gawk-4.1-stable}.

@cindex @code{git push}
You can then work on this branch, making commitments to it as you wish.
Once things are ready to move upstream, you simply use @samp{git push},
and your changes will be pushed up to the main repo.@footnote{Assuming
you have permission to do so, of course.}

You should @strong{never} checkout a branch using the @samp{origin/}
prefix.  Things will get very confused. Always work on local tracking
branches.

@item Purely Local Branches
A @dfn{purely local branch} exists only on your system.  You may be developing
some large new feature, or fixing a very difficult bug, or have a change
for which paperwork has not yet been completed.

In such a case, you would keep your changes on a local branch, and
periodically synchronize it with @code{master} (or whichever upstream
branch you started from).
@end table

This may seem somewhat abstract so far. We demonstrate with commands
and branches in @ref{Development without commit access},
later in this @value{DOCUMENT}.

Let's say you have checked out a copy of @code{gawk-4.1-stable} and
have created a purely local branch named @code{better-random}. Then
our picture now looks like @ref{your-repo-2}, where the @samp{T} column
indicates a tracking branch.

@float Figure,your-repo-2
@caption{Your Local @command{gawk} Repository With a Purely Local Branch}
@smallexample
+===+======================++=============================+
| T |   Local Branches     ||      Remote Branches        |
+===+======================++=============================+
| X | master               || origin/master               |
+---+----------------------++-----------------------------+
| X | gawk-4.1-stable      || origin/gawk-4.1-stable      |
+---+----------------------++-----------------------------+
|   |                      || origin/gawk-4.0-stable      |
+---+----------------------++-----------------------------+
|   |                      || origin/feature/fix-comments |
+---+----------------------++-----------------------------+
|   |                      || ...                         |
+---+----------------------++-----------------------------+
|   | better-random        ||                             |
+---+----------------------++-----------------------------+
@end smallexample
@end float

@node Branches are state
@section Branches Represent Development State

Branches represent development state. At any given time, when you
checkout a particular branch (or create a new one), you have a copy
of the @command{gawk} source tree that you should be able to build
and test.

The following @value{SECTION}s describe the different branches
in the @command{gawk} repository and what they are for, as well
as how to use your own branches.

@menu
* Repo State::                  The different branch types in the repo.
* Local State::                 Managing local branches.
* Remotes::                     What a ``remote'' is.
@end menu

@node Repo State
@subsection Branches in the Savannah Repository

There are several kinds of branches in the Savannah repository.

@table @dfn
@cindex branches, dead
@cindex dead branches
@item Dead Branches
Branches with the prefix @samp{dead-branches/} (such as
@code{dead-branches/const}) hold code that was never merged into the
main code base. For example, a feature which was started, but later
deemed to be unwise to add.  These branches keep the code available,
but they are not updated.

@cindex branches, stable
@cindex stable branches
@item Stable Branches
These branches are used for bug fixes to released versions
of @command{gawk}.  Sometimes new development (i.e., user-visible
changes) also occurs on these branches, although in a perfect world
they would be used only for bug fixes.

These branches have names like @code{gawk-4.1-stable},
@code{gawk-4.0-stable}, and so on.  Once a release has been made from
@code{master}, the previous stable branch is not updated. For example,
once @command{gawk} 4.1.0 was released, no more work was done on
@code{gawk-4.0-stable}.

@cindex branch, main
@cindex main branch
@cindex branch, @code{master}
@cindex @code{master} branch
@item The Main Branch
This is the @code{master} branch.  Here is where most new feature
development takes place, and releases of new major versions are based
off of this branch.

Feature branches are typically based off this branch as well, and when
the feature is deemed complete, merged back into it.

@cindex branches, feature
@cindex feature branches
@item Feature Branches
Often, a proposed new feature or code improvement is quite involved.
It may take some time to perfect, or the @command{gawk} development team
may not be convinced that the feature should be kept.

For this purpose, the team uses branches prefixed with @samp{feature/}.
This prefix is used even for code that simply improves the internals
and does not make a user-visible change.

Having large changes on separate branches makes it easier for members
of the team to review the code, and also makes it easier to keep the
changes up-to-date with respect to @code{master}, since Git excels at
merging commits from one branch to another.
@end table

@node Local State
@subsection Branches in Your Local Repository

@cindex branches, purely local
@cindex purely local branches
Purely local branches are where you do your own development.
You may use purely local branches because you don't have commit rights
to the Savannah repo. You may also use them if you are doing some work
that isn't ready for sharing with the rest of the team, or cannot be
committed for some other reason.

For example, for around a nine-month period, the maintainer kept a
purely local branch for some contributed changes for which paperwork had
not yet been completed.

@node Remotes
@subsection A Closer Look at Branch Naming

@cindex @command{git branch} command, @option{-a} option
Earlier, we said that Git maintains copies of the branches
in the upstream repo, as well as manages your local branches.
You can see all these branches with @samp{git branch -a}:

@example
$ @kbd{git branch -a}
@print{}   gawk-4.1-stable
@print{} * master
@print{}   remotes/origin/HEAD -> origin/master
@print{}   remotes/origin/dead-branches/async-events
@print{}   @dots{}
@print{}   remotes/origin/feature/api-mpfr
@print{}   remotes/origin/feature/array-iface
@print{}   remotes/origin/feature/fix-comments
@print{}   @dots{}
@end example

You'll note that what we've referred to as @samp{origin/} branches
appear in the output with an additional prefix: @samp{remotes/}.
Up to this point, we've treated Git as if it allowed only a single
upstream repository.  But in fact, you can configure it to use more
than one.  All the known upstream repositories are grouped under
the @samp{remotes/} prefix, with @code{remotes/origin} being the one
from which you initially cloned your local repository.

The ability to work with multiple upstream repositories is an
advanced one; @command{gawk} development does not make use of it.
The intent of this @value{SUBSECTION} is to explain the output
from @samp{git branch -a}, nothing more.

@node Configuring git
@chapter Configuring Global Settings For Git

@cindex configuration settings
@cindex settings, configuration
@cindex global configuration settings
@cindex configuration settings, global
Before starting to use Git, you should configure it with some important
settings that won't change as you use Git.  You may configure options
both globally, and on a per-repository basis.  Here, we discuss only
global configuration settings.

@cindex @code{git config}
You can configure Git using either @samp{git config}, or by editing
the relevant files with your favorite text editor.@footnote{You are
required to use either Vim or Emacs, other text editors are not
allowed.  Of course, reasonable developers wouldn't want to use
any other editor anyway.}

@cindex email address
The first things to set are your email address and your real name:

@cindex @code{user.name} configuration setting
@cindex @code{user.email} configuration setting
@cindex configuration setting, @code{user.name}
@cindex configuration setting, @code{user.email}
@example
$ @kbd{git config --global user.name "J.P. Developer"}     @ii{Set full name}
$ @kbd{git config --global user.email jpdev@@example.com}   @ii{Set email address}
@end example

Setting these two items are an absolute requirement.
@strong{Note}: No aliases are allowed. If you can't supply your
real name, you cannot contribute to the project. Other options that
the @command{gawk} maintainer recommends that you use are:

@cindex @code{push.default} configuration setting
@cindex @code{pager.status} configuration setting
@cindex configuration setting, @code{push.default}
@cindex configuration setting, @code{pager.status}
@example
$ @kbd{git config --global push.default simple}    @ii{Only push current branch}
$ @kbd{git config --global pager.status true}      @ii{Use pager for output of} git status
@end example

@cindex @file{.gitconfig} file
The global settings are stored in the @file{.gitconfig} file in your
home directory. The file looks like this:

@example
[user]
        name = J.P. Developer
        email = jpdev@@example.com
[push]
        default = simple
[pager]
        status = true
@end example

The @code{push.default=simple} setting ensures that older
versions of Git only push the current branch up to the Savannah
repo. This is the safest way to operate, and is the default
in current Git versions.

There may be other settings in your configuration file as well.
Use @samp{git config} to see your settings:

@example
$ @kbd{git config --list}
@print{} user.name=J.P. Developer
@print{} user.email=jpdev@@example.com
@print{} push.default=simple
@end example

Here are the @command{gawk} maintainer's settings:

@example
$ @kbd{git config --global --list}
@print{} user.name=Arnold D. Robbins
@print{} user.email=arnold@@@dots{}
@print{} credential.helper=cache --timeout=3600
@print{} push.default=simple
@print{} color.ui=false
@print{} core.autocrlf=input
@print{} pager.status=true
@print{} log.decorate=auto
@end example

Additional, per-project (``local'') settings are stored in
each repo's @file{.git/config} file.

@node Development without commit access
@chapter Development Without Commit Access

In this chapter we present step-by-step recipes for checking out
and working with a local
copy of the Savannah Git repo for @command{gawk}.
The presentation is for when you do not have commit access
to the Git repo, and so you cannot push your changes directly.

@menu
* Cloning::                     Cloning the repo the first time.
* Switching Branches::          Moving from one branch to another.
* Starting A New Branch::       Starting a new branch for development.
* Undoing a change::            Throwing away changes.
* Updating::                    Keeping in sync with the upstream repo.
* Submitting Changes::          How to submit your changes.
* Removing Branches::           Getting rid of unneeded branches.
* Points to remember::          Things you need to keep in mind.
@end menu

@node Cloning
@section Cloning The Repo

@cindex @code{git clone}
Clone the Savannah repo using @samp{git clone}. You may do so using
either the native Git protocol, or using HTTP if you must go through a
gateway or firewall that won't pass the Git protocol.

@cindex URL, for cloning repositories
To choose which method, you supply a @dfn{URL} for the repo when you
clone it, as follows.

@cindex URL, for @command{gawk} repository
@cindex Repository, @command{gawk}, URL for
@itemize @bullet
@item
Clone via the Git native protocol:

@example
$ @kbd{git clone git://git.savannah.gnu.org/gawk.git}     @ii{Clone the repo}
@print{} ...
$ @kbd{cd gawk}                                           @ii{Start working}
@end example

This will be faster, but not all firewalls pass the Git protocol
on through.

@item
Clone via the HTTP protocol:

@example
$ @kbd{git clone http://git.savannah.gnu.org/r/gawk.git}  @ii{Clone the repo}
@print{} ...
$ @kbd{cd gawk}                                           @ii{Start working}
@end example
@end itemize

@emph{You only need to clone the repo once.} From then on, you update its
contents using other Git commands. For example, after coming back from
your vacation in the Bahamas:

@cindex @code{git pull}
@example
$ @kbd{cd gawk}               @ii{Move to the repo}
$ @kbd{make distclean}        @ii{A good idea before updating}
@print{} ...
$ @kbd{git pull}              @ii{Update it}
@end example

To build, you should generally follow this recipe:

@example
$ @kbd{./bootstrap.sh && ./configure && make -j && make check}
@end example

@cindex @file{bootstrap.sh} script
@quotation NOTE
Unless you have installed all the tools described in @ref{GNU Tools},
you @emph{must} run @command{./bootstrap.sh} every time you clone a repo,
do a @samp{git pull} or checkout a different branch. (In the latter case,
do @samp{make distclean} first.)  Otherwise things will get messy very
quickly. The @command{bootstrap.sh} script ensures that all of the file
time stamps are up to date so that it's not necessary to run the various
configuration tools.
@end quotation

@node Switching Branches
@section Switching Branches

So far, we've been working in the default @code{master} branch.
Let's check what's happening in the @code{gawk-4.1-stable} branch:

@cindex @code{git checkout}
@cindex @code{git pull}
@example
$ @kbd{make distclean}                                          @ii{Clean up}
$ @kbd{git checkout gawk-4.1-stable}                            @ii{Checkout a different branch}
@print{} ...
$ @kbd{git pull}                                                @ii{Get up to date}
@print{} ...
$ @kbd{./bootstrap.sh && ./configure && make -j && make check}  @ii{Start working}
@end example

@node Starting A New Branch
@section Starting A New Branch

Let's say you want to work on a new feature. For example,
you might decide to add Python syntax support.@footnote{Just joking.
Please don't attempt this for real.} You should create a
new branch on which to work.  First, switch back to @code{master}:

@cindex @code{git checkout}
@example
$ @kbd{make distclean}
$ @kbd{git checkout master}
@end example

Now, create a new branch. The easiest way to do that is
with the @option{-b} option to @samp{git checkout}:

@example
$ @kbd{git checkout -b feature/python}
@print{} ...
@end example

@cindex @file{ChangeLog} file
@cindex committing changes
You now do massive amounts of work in order to add Python syntax support.
As you do each defined chunk of work, you update the @file{ChangeLog}
file with your changes before @dfn{committing} them to the repo.

@cindex @code{git status}
Let's say you've added a new file @file{python.c} and updated several
others. Use @samp{git status} to see what's changed:

@example
$ @kbd{git status}
@print{} ...
@end example

@cindex @code{git diff}
@cindex @code{git difftool}
@cindex @command{meld} utility
Before committing the current set of changes, you can use @samp{git diff}
to view the changes. You may also use @samp{git difftool}@footnote{Don't
run @samp{git difftool} in the background; it works interactively.} to run an
external @command{diff} command, such as @command{meld} on GNU/Linux:

@example
$ @kbd{git diff}                           @ii{Regular built-in tool}
$ @kbd{git difftool --tool=meld}           @ii{GUI diff tool}
@end example

@cindex @code{git add}
When you're happy with the changes, use @samp{git add} to tell
Git which of the changed and/or new files you wish to have ready to
be committed:

@example
$ @kbd{git add ...}
@end example

@cindex @code{git status}
Use @samp{git status} to see that your changes are scheduled for committing:

@example
$ @kbd{git status}
@print{}
@end example

Now you can commit your changes to your branch:

@cindex @code{git commit}
@example
$ @kbd{git commit}
@end example

@noindent
@cindex @code{git log}
Running @samp{git commit} causes Git to invoke an editor
(typically from the @env{$EDITOR} environment variable)
in which you can compose a commit message. Please supply a
short message summarizing the commit. This message will be
visible via @samp{git log}.

@node Undoing a change
@section Undoing A Change

Should you need to undo a change that you have not yet
committed (so that you can start over), you can do so on
per-file basis by simply checking out the file again:

@cindex @code{git checkout}
@example
git checkout awkgram.y      @ii{Undo changes to} awkgram.y@ii{. There is no output}
@end example

@cindex @code{git reset}
To start over completely, use @samp{git reset --hard}.
Note that this will @emph{throw away} all your changes, with no
chance for recovery, so be sure you really want to do it.

@node Updating
@section Updating and Merging

As you work on your branch, you will occasionally want to bring it
up to date with respect to @code{master}.
This @value{SECTION} discusses updating local branches
and handling merge conflicts.

@menu
* Rebasing::                    Rebasing A Local Branch.
* Merge Conflicts::             Dealing With Merge Conflicts.
@end menu

@node Rebasing
@subsection Rebasing A Local Branch

@cindex rebasing
For purely local branches, bringing  your branch up to date is called
@dfn{rebasing}, which causes the branch to look @emph{as if} you had
started from the latest version of @code{master}.  The steps are as
follows:

@cindex @code{git rebase}
@cindex @code{git checkout}
@cindex @code{git pull}
@example
$ @kbd{git checkout master}                @ii{Checkout} master
$ @kbd{git pull}                           @ii{Update it}
$ @kbd{git checkout feature/python}        @ii{Move back to new, purely local branch}
$ @kbd{git rebase master}                  @ii{``Start over'' from current} master
@end example

@node Merge Conflicts
@subsection Dealing With Merge Conflicts

@cindex conflicts, from merging
@cindex merge conflicts

Sometimes, when merging from @code{master} into your branch, or from
a branch into @code{master}, there will be @dfn{merge conflicts}.
These are one or more areas within a file where there are conflicting
sets of changes, and Git could not do the merge for you.
In this case, the conflicted area will be delimited by the traditional
conflict markers, @samp{<<<}, @samp{===} and @samp{>>>}.

Your mission is then to edit the file and @dfn{resolve} the conflict
by fixing the order of additions (such as in a @file{ChangeLog} file),
or fixing the code to take new changes into account.

Once you have done so, you tell Git that everything is OK using
@samp{git add} and @samp{git commit}:

@example
$ @kbd{git checkout feature/python}        @ii{Move back to new, purely local branch}
$ @kbd{git rebase master}                  @ii{``Start over'' from current} master
@print{} ... Kaboom! Conflict. FIXME: Show real output here
$ @kbd{gvim main.c}                        @ii{Edit the file and fix the problem}
$ @kbd{git add main.c}                     @ii{Tell Git everything is OK now @dots{}}
$ @kbd{git commit}                         @ii{@dots{} and it's settled}
$ @kbd{git rebase --continue}              @ii{Continue the rebase}
@end example

The @command{git rebase --continue} then continues the process of
rebasing the current branch that we started in @ref{Rebasing}.
It's not necessary if you are  using @samp{git merge}
(@pxref{Points to remember}).

@node Submitting Changes
@section Submitting Your Changes

So now your feature is complete. You've added test cases for it to
the test suite@footnote{You did do this, didn't you?}, you have
@file{ChangeLog} entries that describe all the changes@footnote{You remembered this, right?},
you have documented the new feature@footnote{You wouldn't neglect this, would you?},
and everything works great. You're ready
to submit the changes for review, and with any luck, inclusion into
@command{gawk}.

@cindex review, changes you made
@cindex changes, submitting for review
There are two ways to submit your changes for review.

@table @emph
@cindex generating a single patch
@cindex patch, single, generation of
@item Generate a single large patch
To do this, simply compare your branch
to the branch off which it is based:

@cindex @code{git checkout}
@cindex @code{git diff}
@example
$ @kbd{git checkout feature/python}
$ @kbd{git diff master > /tmp/python.diff}
@end example

Mail the @file{python.diff} file to the appropriate mailing list
along with a description of what you've changed and why.

@cindex @code{git format-patch}
@cindex generating multiple patches
@cindex patches, multiple, generation of
@item Generate a set of patches that in toto comprise your changes
To do this, use @samp{git format-patch}:

@cindex @code{git checkout}
@example
$ @kbd{git checkout feature/python}
$ @kbd{git format-patch}
@end example

This creates a set of patch files, one per commit that isn't on the
original branch.  Mail these patches, either separately, or as a set of
attachments, to the appropriate mailing list along with a description
of what you've changed and why.

@end table

Either way you choose to submit your changes, the @command{gawk}
maintainer and development team will review your changes and provide feedback.
If you have signed paperwork with the FSF for @command{gawk} and the maintainer
approves your changes, he will apply the patch(es) and commit the changes.

Which list should you send mail to?  If you are just starting to
contribute, use @email{bug-gawk@@gnu.org}.  After making enough
contributions, you may be invited to join the private @command{gawk}
developers' mailing list. If you do so, then submit your changes to
that list.

If you make any substantial changes, you will need to assign copyright
in those changes to the Free Software Foundation before the maintainer
can commit those changes.  @xref{Doing paperwork}, for more information.

@node Removing Branches
@section Removing Branches

@cindex removing branches
@cindex branches, removing
Once the maintainer has integrated your changes, you can get
rid of your local branch:

@cindex @code{git checkout}
@cindex @code{git pull}
@cindex @code{git branch}
@example
$ @kbd{git checkout master}                 @ii{Move to upstream branch}
$ @kbd{git pull}                            @ii{Update}
$ @kbd{gvim ChangeLog ...}                  @ii{Verify your changes are in}
$ @kbd{git branch -d feature/python}        @ii{Remove your local branch}
@end example

@node Points to remember
@section Points to Remember

There are some important points to remember:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Always do a @samp{make distclean} before switching between branches.
Things will get really confused if you don't.

@item
For upstream branches, @emph{always} work with tracking branches. @emph{Never}
use @samp{git checkout origin/@var{whatever}}.  Git will happily let
you do something like that, but it's just plain asking for trouble.

@item
Make sure your tracking branches are up-to-date before doing anything
with them, particularly using them as the basis for a rebase
or merge.  This typically means a three-step process:

@cindex @code{git checkout}
@cindex @code{git pull}
@example
$ @kbd{git checkout master}             @ii{Get to local copy}
$ @kbd{git pull}                        @ii{Bring it up to date}
$ @kbd{git checkout feature/python}     @ii{Go back to your branch}
@end example

@noindent
You can then do the actual rebase:

@cindex @code{git rebase}
@example
$ @kbd{git rebase master}               @ii{Now rebase your feature off of master}
@end example

@item
Git always treats the currently checked-out branch as the object of
operations.  For example, when comparing files with the regular
@command{diff} command, the usage is @samp{diff @var{oldfile} @var{newfile}}.
For @samp{git diff}, the current branch takes the place of @var{newfile}, thus:

@cindex @code{git checkout}
@cindex @code{git diff}
@example
$ @kbd{git checkout feature/python}
$ @kbd{git diff master}                 @ii{Compare} master @ii{to current branch}
@end example

@noindent
or if merging:

@cindex @code{git checkout}
@cindex @code{git pull}
@cindex @code{git merge}
@example
$ @kbd{git checkout master}             @ii{Checkout} master
$ @kbd{git pull}                        @ii{Update tracking branch}
$ @kbd{git merge feature/python}        @ii{Merge changes into} master
@end example

@end itemize

@node Development with commit access
@chapter Development With Commit Access

This @value{CHAPTER} describes how to do development when you @emph{do}
have commit access to the @command{gawk} repo on Savannah.

@menu
* Initial setup::                   Getting started with commit access.
* ssh clone::                       Cloning using an @samp{ssh://} URL.
* Developing patches::              Developing patches.
* Developing new features::         Developing new features.
* Developing fixes::                Developing fixes.
@end menu

@node Initial setup
@section Initial Setup

Congratulations!  After becoming a quality contributor to @command{gawk}
development, you've been invited to join the private development list
and to accept having commit access to the repo.

@cindex Savannah, creating an account
@cindex account, Savannah, creation of
@cindex @code{ssh} key
The first thing to do is to create an account on Savannah, choosing a
unique user name. To do so, go to the @uref{http://savannah.gnu.org,
Savannah home page} and click on the ``New User'' link.  The setup
will include uploading of your @command{ssh} key, as per the instructions
on the Savannah web page.

After you've done all this, send email to the maintainer with your
Savannah user name, and he will add you to the list of users who have
commit access to the repo.

@node ssh clone
@section Cloning The Repo With An @command{ssh} URL

In order to be able to commit changes to the repo, you must
clone it using an @samp{ssh://} URL.
Cloning the repo with @command{ssh} is similar to cloning
with the Git protocol or with HTTP, but the URL is different:

@cindex @code{git clone}
@cindex URL, for @command{gawk} repository
@cindex Repository, @command{gawk}, URL for
@example
$ @kbd{git clone ssh://yourname@@git.sv.gnu.org/srv/git/gawk.git}
@print{} ...
@end example

Here, you should replace @samp{yourname} in the command with the user
name you chose for use on Savannah.

@node Developing patches
@section Developing Patches

The first part of developing a patch is the same as for developers
without commit access:

@enumerate 1
@item
Develop the code and test it.

@item
@cindex @file{ChangeLog} file
Update the @file{ChangeLog}.

@item
@cindex documentation files
@cindex @file{gawktexi.in} documentation
@cindex @file{gawk.1} manual page
If necessary, update the documentation: @file{doc/gawktexi.in}
and/or @file{doc/gawk.1}.

@cindex @code{git diff}
@item
Use @samp{git diff > mychange.diff} to create a patch file.

@item
Send it to the mailing list for discussion.

@item
Iterate until the patch is ready to be committed.
@end enumerate

However, now that you have commit access, you can commit the fix and push
it up to the repo yourself!
Let's assume you've made a bug fix directly on @code{master}.
Here's how to commit your changes:

@cindex @code{git diff}
@cindex @code{git add}
@cindex @code{git commit}
@cindex @code{git push}
@example
$ @kbd{git diff}            @ii{Review the patch one more time}
$ @kbd{git add @dots{}}         @ii{Add any files for committing}
$ @kbd{git commit}          @ii{Commit the files. Include a commit message.}
$ @kbd{git push}            @ii{Push the files up to the repo. Ta da!}
@end example

The first three steps are the same described earlier
(@pxref{Starting A New Branch}).
The @samp{git push} is what's new, and it updates the repo on
Savannah.  Congratulations!

As a courtesy, you should send a note to the mailing list indicating
that you have pushed your change.

@node Developing new features
@section Developing New Features

Developing a new feature can be easier once you have commit access
to the repo.  First, create a new branch to hold your feature:

@cindex @code{git checkout}
@cindex @code{git pull}
@example
$ @kbd{git checkout master}                     @ii{Start from} master
$ @kbd{git pull}                                @ii{Be sure to be up to date}
$ @kbd{git checkout -b feature/python}          @ii{Create and switch to a new branch}
@end example

Now, you can develop as normal, adding new files if necessary (such as new tests),
modifying code, updating the @file{ChangeLog} and documentation, and so on.

You can share changes with the mailing list as diffs, as usual. However, especially
for a large feature, it would be better to push your branch up to Savannah. Then,
everyone else can simply pull it down to their local systems and review your
changes at their leisure.

To push your branch up initially:

@cindex @code{git diff}
@cindex @code{git add}
@cindex @code{git commit}
@cindex @code{git push}
@example
$ @kbd{git diff}                                @ii{Review your changes}
$ @kbd{git add @dots{}}                             @ii{Add any files for committing}
$ @kbd{git commit}                              @ii{Commit the files. Include a commit message}
$ @kbd{git push -u origin feature/python}       @ii{Push the branch up to the repo}
@end example

When you use @samp{push -u origin}, Git helpfully converts
your purely local branch into a tracking branch. It becomes
as if the branch had originated from the upstream repo
and you checked it out locally.

@emph{You only need to do @samp{git push -u origin} once.}
As you continue to work on your branch, the workflow simplifies
into this:

@cindex @code{git diff}
@cindex @code{git add}
@cindex @code{git commit}
@cindex @code{git push}
@example
$ @kbd{git diff}                @ii{Review your changes}
$ @kbd{git add @dots{}}             @ii{Add any files for committing}
$ @kbd{git commit}              @ii{Commit the files}
$ @kbd{git push}                @ii{Push your changes to the branch upstream}
@end example

@node Developing fixes
@section Developing Fixes

If you want to make a fix on @code{master} or on the current
stable branch, you work the same way, by producing and discussing
a diff on the mailing list.  Once it's approved, you can commit it
yourself:

@cindex @code{git checkout}
@cindex @code{git pull}
@cindex @code{git add}
@cindex @code{git commit}
@cindex @code{git diff}
@example
$ @kbd{git checkout master}     @ii{Move to} master
$ @kbd{git pull}                @ii{Make sure we're up to date with the maintainer}
$ @kbd{gvim @dots{}}                @ii{Make any fixes, compile, test}
$ @kbd{git diff}                @ii{Review your changes}
$ @kbd{git add @dots{}}             @ii{Add any files for committing}
$ @kbd{git commit}              @ii{Commit the files. Include a commit message.}
@end example

When you're ready to push your changes:

@cindex @code{git pull}
@cindex @code{git push}
@example
$ @kbd{git pull}                @ii{Download latest version; Git will merge}
$ @kbd{gvim ...}                @ii{Resolve any merge conflicts with} git add @ii{and} git commit
$ @kbd{git push}                @ii{Now you can push your changes upstream}
@end example

@xref{Merge Conflicts} for instructions on dealing with merge conflicts.

@node General practices
@chapter General Development Practices

This @value{CHAPTER} discusses general practices for @command{gawk} development.
The discussion here is mainly for developers with commit access to the
Savannah repo.

@table @dfn
@cindex propagating fixes to other branches
@cindex fixes, propagating to other branches
@item Propagating Fixes
Usually, bug fixes should be made on the current ``stable'' branch.
Once a fix has been reviewed and approved, you can commit it and
push it yourself.
Typically, the maintainer then takes care to merge the fix to @code{master}
and from there to any other branches. However, you are welcome to
save him the time and do this yourself.

@cindex directory ownership
@cindex ownership of directories
@item Directory ownership
Some developers ``own'' certain parts of the tree, such as the @file{pc} and @file{vms} directories.
They are allowed to commit changes to those directories without review by the mailing
list, but changes that also touch the mainline code should be submitted for review.

@item New feature development
Unless you can convince the maintainer (and the other developers!) otherwise,
you should @emph{always} start branches for new features from @code{master},
and not from the current ``stable'' branch.

Use @samp{checkout -b feature/@var{feature_name}} to create the initial branch.
You may then elect to keep it purely local, or to push it up to Savannah for
review, even if the feature is not yet totally ``ready for prime time.''
@end table

During development of a new feature, you will most likely wish to keep your
feature branch up to date with respect to ongoing improvements in @code{master}.
This is generally easy to do. There are two different mechanisms, and which
one you use depends upon the nature of your new feature branch.

@table @dfn
@item As long as your branch is purely local
You should use @samp{git rebase}
to the keep the branch synchronized with the original branch from which it was forked:

@cindex @code{git checkout}
@cindex @code{git pull}
@cindex @code{git rebase}
@example
$ @kbd{git checkout master}             @ii{Move to} master
$ @kbd{git pull}                        @ii{Bring it up to date}
$ @kbd{git checkout feature/python}     @ii{Move to your new feature branch}
$ @kbd{git rebase master}               @ii{Rebase from} master
@end example

@noindent
The rebasing operation may require that you resolve conflicts
(@pxref{Merge Conflicts}).
Edit any conflicted files and resolve the problem(s). Compile and
test your changes, then use @samp{git add}
and @samp{git commit} to indicate resolution, and then use
@samp{git rebase --continue} to continue the rebasing.
Git is very good about providing short instructions on how to
continue when such conflicts occur.

@item Once the branch has been pushed up to Savannah
You @emph{must} use @samp{git merge} to bring your feature branch up
to date.  That flow looks like this:

@cindex @code{git checkout}
@cindex @code{git pull}
@cindex @code{git merge}
@example
$ @kbd{git checkout master}             @ii{Move to} master
$ @kbd{git pull}                        @ii{Bring it up to date}
$ @kbd{git checkout feature/python}     @ii{Move to your new feature branch}
$ @kbd{git merge master}                @ii{Merge from} master
@end example

@noindent
Here too, you may have to resolve any merge conflicts
(@pxref{Merge Conflicts}).
Once that's done, you can push the changes up to Savannah.

When the changes on your branch are complete, usually the
maintainer merges the branch to @code{master}. But
there's really no magic involved, the merge is simply
done in the other direction:

@cindex @code{git checkout}
@cindex @code{git pull}
@cindex @code{git merge}
@example
$ @kbd{git checkout feature/python}     @ii{Checkout feature branch}
$ @kbd{git pull}                        @ii{Bring it up to date}
$ @kbd{git checkout master}             @ii{Checkout} master
$ @kbd{git pull}                        @ii{Bring it up to date}
$ @kbd{git merge feature/python}        @ii{Merge from} feature/python @ii{into} master
@end example

If you've been keeping @samp{feature/python} in sync with
@code{master}, then there should be no merge conflicts to
resolve, and you can push the result to Savannah:

@cindex @code{git push}
@example
$ @kbd{git push}                        @ii{Push up to Savannah}
@end example

Since @samp{feature/python} is no longer needed, it can be
gotten rid of:

@cindex @code{git branch}
@cindex @code{git push}
@example
$ @kbd{git branch -d feature/python}                 @ii{Still on} master@ii{, delete feature branch}
$ @kbd{git push -u origin --delete feature/python}   @ii{Delete the branch on Savannah}
@end example

The @samp{git push} command deletes the @code{feature/python}
branch from the Savannah repo.

@cindex @code{git fetch}
@noindent
Finally, you should send an email to developer's list describing
what you've done so that everyone else can delete their
copies of the branch and do a @samp{git fetch --prune}
(@pxref{Repo Maintenance}).

To update the other remaining development branches
with the latest changes on @code{master}, use the
@samp{helpers/update-branches.sh} script in the repo.

@end table

@node Repo Maintenance
@chapter Keeping Your Repo Organized

There are a few commands you should know about to help keep
your local repo clean.

@table @emph
@cindex removing old branches
@cindex old branches, removing
@cindex branches, removing
@item Removing old branches
Developers add branches to the Savannah repo and when development
on them is done, they
get merged into @code{master}.  Then the branches on Savannah are
deleted (as shown in @ref{General practices}).

However, your local copies of those branches (labelled with the
@samp{origin/} prefix) remain in your local repo. If you don't
need them, then you can clean up your repo as follows.

First, remove any related tracking branch you may have:

@cindex @code{git pull}
@cindex @code{git branch}
@example
$ @kbd{git pull}                                @ii{Get up to date}
$ @kbd{git branch -d feature/merged-feature}    @ii{Remove tracking branch}
@end example

Then, ask Git to clean things up for you:

@cindex @code{git fetch}
@example
$ @kbd{git fetch --prune}                       @ii{Remove unneeded branches}
@end example

@cindex removing cruft
@cindex cruft, removing
@item Removing cruft
As Git works, occasional ``cruft'' collects in the repository.
Git does occasionally clean this out on its own, but if you're
concerned about disk usage, you can do so yourself
using @samp{git gc} (short for ``garbage collect''). For
example:

@cindex @code{git gc}
@example
$ @kbd{du -s .}                               @ii{Check disk usage}
@print{} 99188   .                            @ii{Almost 10 megabytes}
$ @kbd{git gc}                                @ii{Collect garbage}
@print{} Counting objects: 32114, done.
@print{} Delta compression using up to 4 threads.
@print{} Compressing objects: 100% (6370/6370), done.
@print{} Writing objects: 100% (32114/32114), done.
@print{} Total 32114 (delta 25655), reused 31525 (delta 25231)
$ @kbd{du -s .}                               @ii{Check disk usage again}
@print{} 75168   .                            @ii{Down to 7 megabytes}
@end example

@cindex renaming branches
@cindex branches, renaming
@item Renaming branches
Occasionally you may want to rename a branch.@footnote{This discussion
adopted from
@uref{https://multiplestates.wordpress.com/2015/02/05/rename-a-local-and-remote-branch-in-git, here}.}
If your branch is local and you are on it, us:

@example
$ @kbd{git branch -m feature/@var{new-name}}
@end example

@noindent
Otherwise, use:

@example
$ @kbd{git branch -m feature/@var{old-name} feature/@var{new-name}}
@end example

You then need to fix the upstream repo.  This command does so,
using an older syntax to simultaneously delete the old name and
push the new name. You should be on the new branch:

@example
$ @kbd{git push origin :feature/@var{old-name} feature/@var{new-name}}
@end example

@quotation NOTE
It is the leading @samp{:} in the first branch name that causes
Git to delete the old name in the upstream repo. Don't omit it!
@end quotation

Finally, reset the upstream branch for the local branch
with the new name:

@example
$ @kbd{git push -u origin feature/@var{new-name}}
@end example

@end table

@node Development Stuff
@chapter Development Stuff

This @value{CHAPTER} discusses other things you need to know and/or do
if you're going to participate seriously in @command{gawk} development.

@menu
* Coding style::                Where to read up on the coding style.
* Doing paperwork::             Legal stuff in order to contribute.
* Tools::                       Tools to have on your system for development.
* Debugging::                   Compiling for debugging.
@end menu

@node Coding style
@section Coding Style

@cindex coding style
You should read the discussion about adding code in the @command{gawk}
documentation.
@ifnothtml
@xref{Additions, Additions, Making Additions to @command{gawk}, gawk, GAWK: Effective awk Programming},
for a discussion of the general procedure.  In particular, pay attention to the
coding style guidelines in 
@ref{Adding Code, Adding Code, Adding New Features, gawk, GAWK: Effective awk Programming}.@footnote{Changes that don't follow the coding
style guidelines won't be accepted. Period.}
These two sections may also be found online, at
@uref{https://www.gnu.org/software/gawk/manual/html_node/Additions.html#Additions}, and
@uref{https://www.gnu.org/software/gawk/manual/html_node/Adding-Code.html#Adding-Code},
respectively.
@end ifnothtml
@ifhtml
See @uref{https://www.gnu.org/software/gawk/manual/html_node/Additions.html#Additions,
the section @cite{Making Additions to @command{gawk}}}, in the online documentation
for a discussion of the general procedure.  In particular, pay attention to the
coding style guidelines in 
@uref{https://www.gnu.org/software/gawk/manual/html_node/Adding-Code.html#Adding-Code,
the section @cite{Adding New Features}}, also in the online documentation.
@end ifhtml

@node Doing paperwork
@section Assigning Copyrights to the FSF

@cindex assigning copyright
@cindex copyright, assignment
For any change of more than just a few lines, you will need to assign
copyright in (that is, ownership of) those changes to the Free Software
Foundation.

This is generally an easy thing to do. In particular, you can choose to
use a version of the copyright assignment which assigns all your current
@emph{and future} changes to @command{gawk} to the FSF.  This means
that you only need to do the paperwork once, and from then on all your
changes will automatically belong to the FSF. The maintainer recommends
doing this.

The maintainer will help you with this process once you have a
contribution that warrants it.

@node Tools
@section Software Tools You Will Need

@cindex software tools
This @value{SECTION} discusses additional tools that you may need to
install on your system in order to be in sync with what the @command{gawk}
maintainer uses. It also discusses different C compiler options for use
during code development, and how to compile @command{gawk} for debugging.

@menu
* GNU Tools::                   The GNU Autotools.
* Compilers::                   A discussion of compilers that can be used.
@end menu

@node GNU Tools
@subsection GNU Tools

@cindex GNU software tools
@cindex autotools
If you expect to work with the configuration files and/or the
@file{Makefile} files, you will need to install a number of other GNU
tools. In general, you should be using the latest versions of the tools,
or least the same ones that the maintainer himself uses. This helps
minimize the differences that the maintainer has to resolve when merging
changes, and in general avoids confusion and hassle.
Similarly, you should install the latest GNU documentation tools as well.
The tools are described in the following list:

@table @command
@cindex @command{autoconf}
@cindex GNU @command{autoconf}
@cindex @file{configure.ac} file
@item autoconf
GNU Autoconf processes the @file{configure.ac} files in order to
generate the @file{configure} shell script and @file{config.h.in}
input file. See @uref{https://www.gnu.org/software/autoconf/autoconf.html,
the Autoconf home page} for more information.

@cindex @command{automake}
@cindex GNU @command{automake}
@cindex @file{Makefile.am} file
@item automake
GNU Automake processes the @file{configure.ac} and @file{Makefile.am}
files to produce @file{Makefile.in} files. See @uref{https://www.gnu.org/software/automake,
the Automake home page} for more information.

@cindex @command{gettext}
@cindex GNU @command{gettext}
@cindex @file{gawk.pot} file
@item gettext
GNU Gettext processes the @command{gawk} source code to produce the
original @file{po/gawk.pot} message template file. Normally you
should not need need to do this; the maintainer usually
manages this task. See @uref{https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext,
the Gettext home page} for more information.

@cindex @command{libtool}
@cindex GNU @command{libtool}
@cindex extensions, @command{gawk}
@item libtool
GNU Libtool works with Autoconf and Automake to produce portable
shared libraries. It is used for the extensions that ship with @command{gawk},
whose code is in the @file{extensions} directory.
See @uref{https://www.gnu.org/software/libtool, the Libtool home page}
for more information.

@cindex @command{makeinfo}
@cindex GNU @command{makeinfo}
@cindex @command{Texinfo}
@cindex GNU Texinfo
@item makeinfo
The @command{makeinfo} command is used to build the Info versions of
the documentation. You need to have the same version as the maintainer
uses, so that when you make a change to the documentation, the corresponding
change to the generated Info file will be minimal. @command{makeinfo} is
part of GNU Texinfo. See @uref{https://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo,
the Texinfo home page} for more information.

@end table

@node Compilers
@subsection Compilers

@cindex compilers
@cindex GCC, the GNU Compiler Collection
The default compiler for @command{gawk} development is GCC, the
@uref{https://gcc.gnu.org, GNU Compiler Collection}.
The default version of GCC is whatever is on the
maintainer's personal GNU/Linux system, although he does try to build
the latest released version if that is newer than what's
on his system, and then occasionally test @command{gawk} with it.

@cindex @command{clang} compiler
He also attempts to test occasionally with @uref{https://clang.llvm.org/,
@command{clang}}.  However, he uses whatever is the default for his
GNU/Linux system, and does @emph{not} make an effort to build the current
version for testing.

Both GCC and @command{clang} are highly optimizing compilers that produce
good code, but are very slow.  There are two other compilers that
are faster, but that may not produce quite as good code.  However, they
are both reasonable for doing development.

@table @emph
@cindex @command{tcc} compiler
@cindex Tiny C compiler
@item The Tiny C Compiler, @command{tcc}
This compiler is @emph{very} fast, but it produces only mediocre code.
It is capable of compiling @command{gawk}, and it does so well enough
that @samp{make check} runs without errors.

However, in the past the quality has varied, and the maintainer has
had problems with it. He recommends using it for regular development,
where fast compiles are important, but rebuilding with GCC before doing
any commits, in case @command{tcc} has missed something.@footnote{This
bit the maintainer once.}

See @uref{http://www.tinycc.org, the project's home page} for
some information. More information can be found in the project's
@uref{http://repo.or.cz/tinycc.git, Git repository}. The maintainer builds
from the @code{mob} branch for his work, but after updating it you should
check that this branch still works to compile @command{gawk} before
installing it.

@cindex @command{pcc} compiler
@cindex Portable C compiler
@item The (Revived) Portable C Compiler
This is an updated version of the venerable Unix Portable C Compiler,
PCC.  It accepts ANSI C syntax and supports both older and modern
architectures. It produces better code than @command{tcc} but is slower,
although still much faster than GCC and @command{clang}.

See @uref{http://pcc.ludd.ltu.se, the project's home page} for more
information. See @uref{http://pcc.ludd.ltu.se/supported-platforms}
for instructions about obtaining the code using CVS and building it.

@cindex @command{pcc} compiler, Git mirror
An alternative location for the source is the @command{gawk}
maintainer's @uref{https://github.com/arnoldrobbins/pcc-revived,
Git mirror} of the code.
@end table

@node Debugging
@section Compiling For Debugging

@cindex debugging, compiling for
@cindex compiling for debugging
If you wish to compile for debugging, you should use GCC.  After
running @command{configure} but before running @command{make}, edit the
@file{Makefile} and remove the @option{-O2} flag from the definition of
@code{CFLAGS}.  Optionally, do the same for @file{extensions/Makefile}.
Then run @command{make}.

@cindex @file{.developing} file
You can enable additional debugging code by creating a file
named @file{.developing} in the @command{gawk} source code directory
@emph{before} running @command{configure}.  Doing so enables additional
conditionally-compiled debugging code within @command{gawk}, and adds
additional warning and debugging options if compiling with GCC.

@node Cheat Sheet
@appendix Git Command Cheat Sheet

This @value{APPENDIX} provides an alphabetical list of the Git commands
cited in this @value{DOCUMENT}, along with brief descriptions of
what the commands do.

@cindex @code{git help}
@cindex @option{--help} option for @command{git}
@cindex @command{git} command, @option{--help} option
Note that you may always use either @samp{git help @var{command}}
or @samp{git @var{command} --help} to get short, man-page style
help on how to use any given Git command.

@table @code
@item git add
Add a file to the list of files to be committed.

@item git branch
View existing branches, or delete a branch.
Most useful options: @option{-a} and @option{-d}.

@item git checkout
Checkout an existing branch, create a new branch, or checkout a file to
reset it. Use the @option{-b} option to create and checkout a
new branch in one operation.

@item git clone
Clone (make a new copy of) an existing repository. You generally
only need to do this once.

@item git commit
Commit changes to files which have been staged for committing
with @samp{git add}.
This makes your changes permanent, @emph{in your local repository only}.
To publish your changes to an upstream repo, you must use @samp{git push}.

@item git config
Display and/or change global and/or local configuration settings.

@item git diff
Show a unified-format diff of what's changed in the current directory
as of the last commit.  It helps to have Git configured to use
its builtin pager for reviewing diffs (@pxref{Configuring git}).

@item git difftool
Use a ``tool'' (usually a GUI-based program) to view differences,
instead of the standard textual diff as you'd get from @samp{git diff}.

@item git fetch
Update your local copy of the upstream's branches. That is,
update the various @samp{origin/} branches. This leaves your
local tracking branches unchanged.
With the @option{--prune} option, this removes any copies
of stale @samp{origin/} branches.

@item git format-patch
Create a series of patch files, one per commit not on the
original branch from which you started.

@item git gc
Run a ``garbage collection'' pass in the current repository.
This can often reduce the space used in a large repo. For
@command{gawk} it does not make that much difference.

@item git help
Print a man-page--style usage summary for a command.

@item git log
Show the current branch's commit log. This includes who
made the commit, the date, and the commit message.
Commits are shown from newest to oldest.

@item git merge
Merge changes from the named branch into the current one.

@item git pull
When in your local tracking branch @code{@var{xxx}},
run @samp{git fetch}, and then merge from @code{origin/@var{xxx}}
into @code{@var{xxx}}.

@item git push
Push commits from your local tracking branch @code{@var{xxx}}
through @code{origin/@var{xxx}} and on to branch @code{@var{xxx}}
in the upstream repo. Use @samp{git push -u origin --delete @var{xxx}} to delete
an upstream branch. (Do so carefully!)

@item git rebase
Rebase the changes in the current purely local branch to
look as if they had been made relative to the latest
commit in the current upstream branch (typically @code{master}).
This is how you keep your local, in-progress changes up-to-date
with respect to the original branch from which they were started.

@item git reset
@cindex @code{git reset}, @option{--hard} option
Restore the original state of the repo, especially with the
@option{--hard} option.  Read up on this command, and use it carefully.

@item git status
Show the status of files that are scheduled to be committed,
and those that have been modified but not yet scheduled for committing.
Use @samp{git add} to schedule a file for committing.
This command also lists untracked files.

@end table

@node Resources
@appendix Git Resources

@cindex @cite{Pro Git} book
There are many Git resources available on the Internet.
Start at the @uref{http://git-scm.org, Git Project home page}.
In particular, the @uref{https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2,
@cite{Pro Git} book} is available online.

@cindex Savannah, using Git guide
See also @uref{http://savannah.gnu.org/maintenance/UsingGit,
the Savannah quick introduction to Git}.

@node TODO
@appendix Stuff Still To Do In This Document

@itemize @bullet
@item
Fill out all examples with full output

@end itemize

@ifnotdocbook
@node Index
@unnumbered Index
@end ifnotdocbook
@printindex cp

@bye
